
The principles of Buddhist philosophy (The Core Beliefs in Buddhism) in practice are: 
The Four Noble Truths, the Noble Eightfold Path and The Five Precepts....

THE FOUR NOBLE TRUTHS


The First Noble Truth
Unsatisfactoriness and suffering exist and are universally experienced.


The Second Noble Truth
Desire and attachment are the causes of unsatisfactoriness and suffering.


The Third Noble Truth 
There is an end to unsatisfactoriness and suffering.


The Fourth Noble Truth
The end can be attained by journeying on the Noble Eightfold Path.




 



NOBLE EIGHTFOLD PATH


1. Right View/Understanding
(Understanding the Four Noble Truths) - See things as they truly are without delusions or distortions for all things change. Develop wisdom by knowing how things work, knowing oneself and others.

2. Right Thinking
Decide to set a life on the correct path. Wholehearted resolution and dedication to overcoming the dislocation of self-centered craving through the development of loving kindness, empathy and compassion. 


3. Right Speech
Abstinence from lies and deceptions, backbiting, idle babble and abusive speech. Cultivate honesty and truthfulness; practice speech that is kind and benevolent. Let your words reflect your desire to help, not harm others. 


4.Right Conduct
(Following the Five Precepts) - Practice self-less conduct that reflects the highest statement of the life you want to live. Express conduct that is peaceful, honest and pure showing compassion for all beings.

5. Right Livelihood
Earn a living that does not harm living things. Avoidance of work that causes suffering to others or that makes a decent, virtuous life impossible. Do not engage in any occupation that opposes or distracts one from the path. Love and serve our world through your work.

6. Right Effort
Seek to make the balance between the exertion of following the spiritual path and a moderate life that is not over-zealous. Work to develop more wholesome mind states, while gently striving to go deeper and live more fully.


7. Right Mindfulness
Become intensely aware of all the states in body, feeling, and mind. Through constant vigilance in thought, speech and action seek to rid the mind of self-centered thoughts that separate and replace them with those that bind all beings together. Be aware of your thoughts, emotions, body and world as they exist in the present moment. Your thoughts create your reality.

8. Right Concentration
Deep meditation to lead to a higher state of consciousness (enlightenment). Through the application of meditation and mental discipline seek to extinguish the last flame of grasping consciousness and develop an emptiness that has room to embrace and love all things.

 



 



THE FIVE PRECEPTS


The Five Precepts are basic ethical guidelines for the followers of Buddhism. 
They are undertaken voluntarily, rather than as commandments from a god. 

Essentially, these precepts promote harmony and reduce suffering between ourselves 
and others. The underpinning moral code has two qualities: compassion (karuna) 
and loving kindness (metta), which are used as the guiding principles in life. 



1. I undertake the precept to refrain from destroying living creatures.

2. I undertake the precept to refrain from taking that which is not given.

3. I undertake the precept to refrain from sexual misconduct.

4. I undertake the precept to refrain from incorrect speech.

5. I undertake the precept to refrain from intoxicatants.