Whatever position you choose—sitting on a chair, sitting or kneeling on a cushion or low bench—choose a posture you can hold comfortably for 10 minutes.

1. Once you’re seated, roll your hips slightly forward, allowing your belly to relax and your breath to move freely.

2. Center your spine by gently swaying from left to right in decreasing arcs.

3. Push the crown of your head toward the ceiling, straightening and extending your spine. Then relax your shoulders.

4. Your head should not tilt forward, backward or lean to the side. Your ears should be over your shoulders with your nose in line with the navel.

5. Lower your eyes to a 45-degree angle, looking about three feet in front of you without focusing your gaze. If there is a wall there, look as if you were seeing through the wall.

6. Keep your lips and teeth gently closed with the tip of your tongue against the roof of your mouth behind your front teeth. Swallow and suck the saliva from your mouth, creating a vacuum.

7. Rest your hands on your lap, thighs, or lower abdomen, where they do not create stress on your arms. Place your hands left hand on top of the right, palms up, tips of your thumbs lightly touching, forming a wide oval. This is called the “cosmic mudra” or resting bringing wisdom (left hand) together with compassion (right hand) to your practice and daily life.

8. The whole point is to find an alert, energetic posture that will allow you to sit very still. Check yourself each time you sit, forming the habit of careful attentiveness to your body posture before practice.

9. Breathe in through the nose, letting the air fill your lower abdomen as if it were a balloon, then gently release it with a slow, deep breath out… in and out, in and out.

10. Count one on the in-breath, two on the out-breath, three on the in-breath, four on the out-breath, and so on—up to ten. Then begin at one again. If it is more comfortable for you, you may count the out-breaths only and follow the in-breath without counting. If a thought causes you to stray from the counting, just take notice of that, return your focus to the breath, and begin counting again, starting at one.